feat(aep-64): add JWT authentication for provider API to improve reliability and access control (#24)
akash-network/AEP: spec/aep-64/README.md

---
aep: 64
title: "JWT authentication for provider API"
author: Artur Troian (@troian)
status: Draft
type: Standard
category: Core
created: 2025-04-03
updated: 2025-04-03
roadmap: major
---

## Motivation

Enhance tenant authentication to the provider gateway using JWT allows client API to retain communication with leases during blockchain maintenance.

## Summary

> mTLS authentication is great security mechanism, however, with current implementation when blockchain acts as root of trust, it becomes complicated for API clients to retain communication with leases during blockchain maintenance windows. There are also other limitations like granual access. Certificate gives access to all all leases and all features, tho granual access is possible via certificate, implementing and maintaining it for clients is challenging topic. JWT on other hand is wide adopted approach for authentication and authorization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mTLS authentication is great security mechanism, however, with current implementation when blockchain acts as root of trust, it becomes complicated for API clients to retain communication with leases during blockchain maintenance windows. There are also other limitations like granular access. Certificate gives access to all all leases and all features, though granular access is possible via certificates, implementing and maintaining it for clients is a challenging topic. JWT on the other hand is a widely adopted approach for authentication and authorization.
```

> mTLS authentication is great security mechanism, however, with current implementation when blockchain acts as root of trust, it becomes complicated for API clients to retain communication with leases during blockchain maintenance windows. There are also other limitations like granual access. Certificate gives access to all all leases and all features, tho granual access is possible via certificate, implementing and maintaining it for clients is challenging topic. JWT on other hand is wide adopted approach for authentication and authorization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mTLS authentication is great security mechanism, however, with current implementation when blockchain acts as root of trust, it becomes complicated for API clients to retain communication with leases during blockchain maintenance windows. There are also other limitations like granual access. Certificate gives access to all leases and all features, although granual access is possible via certificate, implementing and maintaining it for clients is a challenging topic. JWT on other hand is wide adopted approach for authentication and authorization.
```

Reviewer 2: It's also very challenging for client applications to manage certificates as the client need to store the private key somewhere (in the browser local storage in the case of console and up to the customer for the managed wallet api)

## Technical details

Akash uses asymetric keys (ECDSA) for wallets with secp256k1 curve and allows for signing and encrypting messages.

> For this AEP, we will be focused on signing part only.

Reviewer: Off-topic (for this AEP): Through mTLS, the SDLs are encrypted using the public key of the provider which guarantees that only the provider is able to decrypt the SDL (IIRC). How will we prevent this with client-side JWT? Will we still encrypt SDL using the providers public key? What's expected from the context of this AEP?

Author: Manifest is not encrypted with the provider's public key, it is rather being send via TLS transport

> Conventionally, JWT is being issued by the server to the client upon authentication, with Akash Network, however, client will be issuing the JWT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conventionally, JWT is being issued by the server to the client upon authentication, with Akash Network, however, the client will be issuing the JWT.
```

Reasons for this are following:
- single wallet may have multiple simultaneous leases on different providers
- lease owner is only who can create granual access JWT, for example one that can only pull logs for certain lease(s) and/or service(s)

> - public key of the wallet is on the blockchain which allows any provider to validate authenticity of the signature

Reviewer: Would be worth stating here that this public key is already on the blockchain and doesn't need publishing because we will be using the account's public key (available on-chain after the first transaction made with that account). Do you believe its relevant and accurate?

Author: Line 30 does state this?

> Added benefit of adding JWT is using standalone ca-certificates and certificates from LetsEncrypt, which eliminates need for custom TLS handshake handler on client side of the API.

Reviewer 2: This means we won't need to have a provider proxy anymore! 🎉

## Implementation

> JWT tokens in this implementation are considered short lived as it is challenging to implement revokation mechanism.

Reviewer 3: **thought**: there is one interesting way, how to revoke all or certain JWT tokens. Basically if we change secret, or use some value in the secret which can be changed by user or system, then this technically revokes all the tokens previously created with the old signature.

Author: There won't be ability to change secret in this case, if private key of the account leak, the entire account becomes compromised

> The discression of how long token lives will be left to implementation, recommendation however is to keep it within 15min window.

Reviewer 2: In the case of lease logs/events, the authentication is only done once on connection and doesn't have to be re-authenticated after the 15min window right?

### Workflow

On lease created event, provider queries lease owner's public key from the blockchain and stores it in local cache.

> The caching must be persistent and survive provider service restarts and updates.

Reviewer 2: Where would the lease owner's public key be stored? I guess it can always be queried in case of the cache losing it

Reviewer 2: Also, what's the workflow for clients? Everytime we want to communicate with the provider, we call an endpoint on the provider that generates a new JTW token?

Reviewer 2: Ah ok I see, thanks for the explanation.

Author: Good call, I'll add it to the description. JWT schema will be in the akash-api repo

Author: added schema

### JWT Specification

```json
{
    "iss": "<owner account>", // akash address of lease(s) owner
    "version": "v1",
    "alg": "ES256K", // the alg must always be ES256K
    "created": "2006-01-02T15:04:05Z07:00", // timestamp in RFC3339 format
    "nva": "2006-01-02T15:04:05Z07:00", // not valid after, RFC3339 format

>     "admin" : true,  // set to true if token can access any leases owned by account. if permissions is non-empty, this field must be set to false

Reviewer 3: **suggestion**: I think would be nice to be more explicit here and instead of `admin` use something more verbose and self-descriptive like `access: “full” | “granular”` or `full | limited`.  Additionally this opens possibility of future extensions like `access: “by_role”`

Author: good call, thanks.
